|PyPI version| |Test Status| |Analyze Status| |CodeQL Status| |Coverage| |Commits since last|

.. |PyPI version| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/vermin.svg
   :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/vermin/

.. |Test Status| image:: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/workflows/Test/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/actions

.. |Analyze Status| image:: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/workflows/Analyze/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/actions

.. |CodeQL Status| image:: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/workflows/CodeQL/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/security/code-scanning

.. |Coverage| image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/netromdk/vermin/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/netromdk/vermin?branch=master

.. |Commits since last| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/commits-since/netromdk/vermin/latest.svg

Vermin
******

Concurrently detect the minimum Python versions needed to run code. Additionally, since the code is
vanilla Python, and it doesn't have any external dependencies, it works with v2.7+ and v3+.

It functions by parsing Python code into an abstract syntax tree (AST), which it traverses and
matches against internal dictionaries with **3427** rules, covering v2.0-2.7 and v3.0-3.10, divided
into **144** modules, **2356** classes/functions/constants members of modules, **801** kwargs of
functions, **4** strftime directives, **3** bytes format directives, **2** array typecodes, **3**
codecs error handler names, **20** codecs encodings, **75** builtin generic annotation types, **9**
builtin dict union (``|``) types, **8** builtin dict union merge (``|=``) types, and **2** user
function decorators.

Backports of the standard library, like ``typing``, can be enabled for better results.

The project is fairly well-tested with **3601** unit and integration tests that are executed on
Linux, macOS, and Windows.

It is recommended to use the most recent Python version to run Vermin on projects since Python's own
language parser is used to detect language features, like f-strings since Python 3.6 etc.

Usage
=====

It is fairly straightforward to use Vermin::

  ./vermin.py /path/to/your/project

Or via `PyPi <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/vermin/>`__::

  % pip install vermin
  % vermin /path/to/your/project

`Homebrew <https://brew.sh>`__ (`pkg <https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/vermin#default>`__)::

  % brew install vermin

`Spack <https://spack.io>`__ (`pkg <https://github.com/spack/spack/blob/develop/var/spack/repos/builtin/packages/py-vermin/package.py>`__)::

  % git clone https://github.com/spack/spack.git
  % . spack/share/spack/setup-env.sh  # depending on shell
  % spack install py-vermin
  % spack load py-vermin

`Arch Linux (AUR) <https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/python-vermin/>`__::

  % yay -S python-vermin

When using continuous integration (CI) tools, like `Travis CI <https://travis-ci.org/>`_, Vermin can
be used to check that the minimum required versions didn't change. The following is an excerpt::

  install:
  - ./setup_virtual_env.sh
  - pip install vermin
  script:
  - vermin -t=2.7 -t=3 project_package otherfile.py

Vermin can also be used as a `pre-commit <https://pre-commit.com/>`__ hook:

.. code-block:: yaml

  repos:
    - repo: https://github.com/netromdk/vermin
      rev: e88bda9
      hooks:
        - id: vermin
          # specify your target version here, OR in a Vermin config file as usual:
          args: ['-t=3.8']

When using the hook, a target version must be specified via a Vermin config file in your package,
or via the ``args`` option in your ``.pre-commit-config.yaml`` config (shown above). For further
information on setting up pre-commit for your project, see the `pre-commit docs <https://pre-commit.com/#quick-start>`__.

Features
========

Features detected include v2/v3 ``print expr`` and ``print(expr)``, ``long``, f-strings, coroutines
(``async`` and ``await``), asynchronous generators (``await`` and ``yield`` in same function),
asynchronous comprehensions, ``await`` in comprehensions, asynchronous ``for``-loops, boolean
constants, named expressions, keyword-only parameters, positional-only parameters, ``nonlocal``,
``yield from``, exception context cause (``raise .. from ..``), ``set`` literals, ``set``
comprehensions, ``dict`` comprehensions, infix matrix multiplication, ``"..".format(..)``, imports
(``import X``, ``from X import Y``, ``from X import *``), function calls wrt. name and kwargs,
``strftime`` + ``strptime`` directives used, function and variable annotations (also ``Final`` and
``Literal``), ``continue`` in ``finally`` block, modular inverse ``pow()``, array typecodes, codecs
error handler names, encodings, ``%`` formatting and directives for bytes and bytearray, ``with``
statement, multiple context expressions in a ``with`` statement, unpacking assignment, generalized
unpacking, ellipsis literal (`...`) out of slices, dictionary union (``{..} | {..}``), dictionary
union merge (``a = {..}; a |= {..}``), builtin generic type annotations (``list[str]``), function
decorators, class decorators, relaxed decorators, pattern matching with ``match``, and union types
written as ``X | Y``. It tries to detect and ignore user-defined functions, classes, arguments, and
variables with names that clash with library-defined symbols.

Caveats
=======

Self-documenting fstrings detection has been disabled by default because the built-in AST cannot
distinguish ``f'{a=}'`` from ``f'a={a}'``, for instance, since it optimizes some information away
(`#39 <https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/issues/39>`__). And this incorrectly marks some source
code as using fstring self-doc when only using general fstring. To enable (unstable) fstring
self-doc detection, use ``--feature fstring-self-doc``.

Function and variable annotations aren't evaluated at definition time when ``from __future__ import
annotations`` is used (`PEP 563 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0563/>`__). This is why
``--no-eval-annotations`` is on by default (since v1.1.1, `#66
<https://github.com/netromdk/vermin/issues/66>`__). If annotations are being evaluated at runtime,
like using ``typing.get_type_hints`` or evaluating ``__annotations__`` of an object,
``--eval-annotations`` should be used for best results.

Configuration file
==================

Vermin automatically tries to detect a config file, starting in the current working directory where
it is run, following parent folders until either the root or project boundary files/folders are
reached. However, if ``--config-file`` is specified, no config is auto-detected and loaded.

Config file names being looked for: ``vermin.ini``, ``vermin.conf``, ``.vermin``, ``setup.cfg``

Project boundary files/folders: ``.git``, ``.svn``, ``.hg``, ``.bzr``, ``_darcs``, ``.fslckout``

A sample config file can be found `here <sample.vermin.ini>`__.

Note that Vermin config can be in the same INI file as other configs, like the commonly used
``setup.cfg``:

.. code-block:: ini

  [vermin]
  verbose = 1
  processes = 4

  [flake8]
  ignore = E111,F821

Examples
========

.. code-block:: console

  % ./vermin.py -q vermin
  Minimum required versions: 2.7, 3.0

  % ./vermin.py -q -t=3.3 vermin
  Minimum required versions: 2.7, 3.0
  Target versions not met:   3.3
  % echo $?
  1

  % ./vermin.py -q --versions vermin
  Minimum required versions: 2.7, 3.0
  Version range:             2.0, 2.6, 2.7, 3.0

  % ./vermin.py -v examples
  Detecting python files..
  Analyzing 6 files using 8 processes..
               /path/to/examples/formatv2.py
  2.7, 3.2     /path/to/examples/argparse.py
  2.7, 3.0     /path/to/examples/formatv3.py
  2.0, 3.0     /path/to/examples/printv3.py
  !2, 3.4      /path/to/examples/abc.py
               /path/to/examples/unknown.py
  Minimum required versions:   3.4
  Incompatible versions:         2

  % ./vermin.py -vv /path/to/examples/abc.py
  Detecting python files..
  Analyzing using 8 processes..
  !2, 3.4      /path/to/examples/abc.py
    'abc' requires 2.6, 3.0
    'abc.ABC' requires !2, 3.4

  Minimum required versions: 3.4
  Incompatible versions:     2

  % ./vermin.py -vvv /path/to/examples/abc.py
  Detecting python files..
  Analyzing using 8 processes..
  !2, 3.4      /path/to/examples/abc.py
    L1 C7: 'abc' requires 2.6, 3.0
    L2: 'abc.ABC' requires !2, 3.4

  Minimum required versions: 3.4
  Incompatible versions:     2

  % ./vermin.py -f parsable /path/to/examples/abc.py
  /path/to/examples/abc.py:1:7:2.6:3.0:'abc' module
  /path/to/examples/abc.py:2::!2:3.4:'abc.ABC' member
  /path/to/examples/abc.py:::!2:3.4:
  :::!2:3.4:

Linting: Showing only target versions violations
================================================

Vermin shows lots of useful minimum version results when run normally, but it can also be used as a
linter to show only rules violating specified target versions by using ``--violations`` and one or
two ``--target`` values. Verbosity level 2 is automatically set when showing only violations, but
can be increased if necessary. The final versions verdict is still calculated and printed at the end
and the program exit code signifies whether the specified targets were met (``0``) or violated
(``1``). However, if no rules are triggered the exit code will be ``0`` due to inconclusivity.

.. code-block:: console

  % cat test.py
  import argparse  # 2.7, 3.2
  all()            # 2.5, 3.0
  enumerate()      # 2.3, 3.0

  % ./vermin.py -t=2.4- -t=3 --violations test.py ; echo $?
  Detecting python files..
  Analyzing using 8 processes..
  2.7, 3.2     test.py
    'all' member requires 2.5, 3.0
    'argparse' module requires 2.7, 3.2

  Minimum required versions: 2.7, 3.2
  Target versions not met:   2.4-, 3.0
  1

The two first lines violate the targets but the third line matches and is therefore not shown.

API (experimental)
==================

Information such as minimum versions, used functionality constructs etc. can also be accessed
programmatically via the ``vermin`` Python module, though it's an experimental feature. It is still
recommended to use the command-line interface.

.. code-block:: python

  >>> import vermin as V
  >>> V.version_strings(V.detect("a = long(1)"))
  '2.0, !3'

  >>> config = V.Config()
  >>> config.add_exclusion("long")
  >>> V.version_strings(V.detect("a = long(1)", config))
  '~2, ~3'

  >>> config.set_verbose(3)
  >>> v = V.visit("""from argparse import ArgumentParser
  ... ap = ArgumentParser(allow_abbrev=True)
  ... """, config)
  >>> print(v.output_text(), end="")
  L1 C5: 'argparse' module requires 2.7, 3.2
  L2: 'argparse.ArgumentParser(allow_abbrev)' requires !2, 3.5
  >>> V.version_strings(v.minimum_versions())
  '!2, 3.5'

Lax Mode (deprecated)
=====================

*Deprecated as of v. 1.3. Will be removed in v. 1.4. It is recommended to use specific analysis
exclusions instead.*

Vermin parses Python source code into abstract syntax trees (ASTs) which it traverses to do
analysis. However, it doesn't do conditional logic, i.e. deciding which branches will be taken at
runtime, since it can cause unexpected side-effects to actually evaluate code. As an example,
analysis of the following:

.. code-block:: python

  if False:
    print(f"..but I won't be evaluated")

Will yield "f-strings require 3.6+" even though the branch will not be evaluated at runtime.

The lax mode, via argument ``--lax``, was created to circumvent cases like this. *But it's not a
perfect solution* since it will skip all ``if``, ternarys, ``for``, ``async for``, ``while``,
``with``, ``try``, boolean operations, and ``match``. Therefore it is recommended to run with and
without lax mode to get a better understanding of individual cases.

Analysis Exclusions
===================

Another approach to conditional logic than lax mode, is to exclude modules, members, kwargs, codecs
error handler names, or codecs encodings by name from being analysed via argument ``--exclude
<name>`` (multiple can be specified). Consider the following code block that checks if
``PROTOCOL_TLS`` is an attribute of ``ssl``:

.. code-block:: python

  import ssl
  tls_version = ssl.PROTOCOL_TLSv1
  if hasattr(ssl, "PROTOCOL_TLS"):
    tls_version = ssl.PROTOCOL_TLS

It will state that "'ssl.PROTOCOL_TLS' requires 2.7, 3.6" but to exclude that from the results, use
``--exclude 'ssl.PROTOCOL_TLS'``. Afterwards, only "'ssl' requires 2.6, 3.0" will be shown and the
final minimum required versions are v2.6 and v3.0 instead of v2.7 and v3.6.

Code can even be excluded on a more fine grained level using the ``# novermin`` or ``# novm``
comments at line level. The following yields the same behavior as the previous code block, but only
for that particular ``if`` and its body:

.. code-block:: python

  import ssl
  tls_version = ssl.PROTOCOL_TLSv1
  if hasattr(ssl, "PROTOCOL_TLS"):  # novermin
    tls_version = ssl.PROTOCOL_TLS

In scenarios where multiple tools are employed that use comments for various features, exclusions
can be defined by having ``#`` for each comment "segment":

.. code-block:: python

  if hasattr(ssl, "PROTOCOL_TLS"):  # noqa # novermin # pylint: disable=no-member
    tls_version = ssl.PROTOCOL_TLS

Note that if a code base does not have any occurrences of ``# novermin`` or ``# novm``, speedups up
to 30-40%+ can be achieved by using the ``--no-parse-comments`` argument or ``parse_comments = no``
config setting.

Contributing
============

Contributions are very welcome, especially adding and updating detection rules of modules,
functions, classes etc. to cover as many Python versions as possible. For PRs, make sure to keep the
code vanilla Python and run ``make test`` first. Note that code must remain valid and working on
Python v2.7+ and v3+.
